---
title: "Generative Podium"
excerpt: "Large Format 3D Printing a Podium"
header:
  image: /assets/img/Podium-Banner.jpg
  teaser: /assets/img/Podium-Preview.jpg
   
---
## Model Creation and Discussion
For an assignment in ChBE 4200, generative design (GD) had to be leveraged to create a podium that could be printed on a large format 3D printer. To create a well-constructed podium using GD that is conducive to large format 3D-printing (LF3DP), a careful, methodical approach had to be taken when first setting up the GD study in Fusion 360. First, the basic geometry of the podium that needed to be preserved in the final design had to be created so as to inform Fusion 360 what must remain across design iterations; for my design, this included a slanted top, a middle shelf, a base that doubles as a lower shelf, and a front structural support upon which a Vanderbilt logo and “DF” initials could be added. The front support also doubles as a method to maximize the amount of podium space that is in contact with the build plate since the use of supports and extreme overhangs isn’t compatible with LF3DP. Following this, obstacle geometry of approximately 17” x 13” x 15” was created above each shelf; obstacle geometry informs Fusion 360 where generated material cannot go which, in this case, was needed above the shelves so that they could actually be used to store various items. Within Fusion 360, the bottom of the podium was grounded via a fixed constraint, and three loads were applied including 200 lbf applied to the slanted top, middle shelf, and as a perpendicular force to the middle shelf effectively serving as someone running into the podium. Additional constraints were defined such as selected additive manufacturing in the +Y direction, specifying a minimum thickness of 30 mm, and an overhang angle of 35°. While the large format 3D printer used in this project supports an overhang angle of up to 45°, I found that reducing this supported angle and increasing the resolution of the study to its maximum value yielded prints more conducive to an LF3DP print with minimal alterations to the resultant part after the study. This was not the case in earlier iterations where extensive modifications had to be made in the Form workspace within Fusion 360 to create anything close to a usable part.

## CAD Model
<iframe src="https://vanderbilt643.autodesk360.com/shares/public/SH512d4QTec90decfa6e48e71d7f94240618?mode=embed" width="640" height="480" allowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true"  frameborder="0"></iframe>

## Discussion
LF3DP and GD are both relatively new technologies experiencing rapid development within the field of additive manufacturing. Both are currently revolutionizing the process by which products are manufactured and designed. LF3DP is the 3D printing of objects scaled up to support the production of objects at an industrial scale. Rather than being constrained by the small print volumes of hobbyist or commercial 3D printers, LF3DP devices would allow a user to print significantly larger parts by permitting large build volumes. For instance, the build volume of the printer the podium is designed to be printed on in this project has a build volume of 4’ x 4’ x 4’ x 4’. As such, parts can be designed and manufactured with much more flexibility regarding the size of the part. As the technology continues to develop, it has the potential to be used in a wide range of industries and applications since the wider range of parts buildable through LF3DP is more conducive to a wider range of applications.

On the other hand, GD is an iterative design process in which a software can generate numerous 3D part outputs meeting constraints specified by the designer. These real-world constraints can consist of mounting points, loads, and constraints along with particular geometry that must be built or avoided in any given model. With these given parameters, the AI driven process can then work to come up with an original solution. GD is an efficient way to quickly generate optimized parts. These parts can be optimized with certain objectives such as minimizing the weight of the part or maximizing its stiffness. Certain GD softwares incorporate additional features into the generative study workspace including selecting the material, manufacturing method, and safety factor of the part. This amount of customization can lend itself to the generation of incredibly streamlined parts that are generally conducive to your individual needs. Even with these design criteria, however, GD parts tend to have organic shapes that can be difficult or even impossible in some cases to create using traditional manufacturing techniques. Because of this, it is vital that the application of the envisioned part and its conditions be given their due consideration in order to properly guide the GD software with relevant constraints. If used properly, though, GD can give a designer many unique design concepts that address their needs and even introduce the possibility of consolidating several parts into a single part if the software is utilized properly.

Regarding the field of residential construction, integrating additive manufacturing into this established industry offers several benefits and solutions to many of its most pressing issues. Some of the most distinct characteristics of 3D printing are its relatively quick speed and low cost when compared to more traditional manufacturing methods. This could potentially be leveraged to quickly respond to disasters and crises by rapidly providing emergency shelters and relevant accommodations in devastated areas to aid in disaster relief movements. Additionally, if certain aspects of a particularly hazardous or more remote environment are known such as the topology of rocky terrain, GD can aid in creating a streamlined, efficient build that is equipped to handle these conditions. Should this occur, both residents and workers would benefit greatly from the autonomous creation of safe residence in dangerous environments given that the incorporation of these technologies would make residence construction more feasible and likely less expensive. On this topic, LF3DP for residential construction eliminates the need for traditional construction materials, reduces waste and errors, and requires fewer labor hours. All of these could contribute to a faster, cheaper construction process which, traditionally, can take months or even years. With the world population growing at a rapid pace, traditional construction methods struggle to keep up with the increasing demand for affordable housing. With lower construction costs and shorter build times offered by additive manufacturing technologies, the cost of homeownership can be significantly reduced, making homeownership more accessible to a wider range of people. This new, revolutionary method of construction also enables a great degree of personalization in a home. Practical customization could see designers making simple adjustments to a 3D model to tailor the domicile to the specific needs, preferences, and design specifications of any individual which could greatly improve the quality of life and wellbeing of the homeowner.

LF3DP has already been used in architecture and vehicle design which can be seen in Oak Ridge National Laboratory's AMIE demonstration in which a 3D-printed building and vehicle combine to form an integrated energy system. This highlighted the potential and viability of this innovation to the construction industry. As the technology has continued to develop, concrete mixes have shown to be a high-performance candidate material that can also be adjusted to the specific conditions and constraints of the environment and build. While this is promising, it has proven to be difficult to build load-bearing components, not to mention the fact that the mechanical properties of 3D-printed elements could change over time which will undoubtedly affect the structural integrity and strength of the printed homes. As such, future innovation within the field must focus on development of better structural material candidates, specifically within the fields of achieving high strengths in flexure, compression, and tension whilst also maintaining low shrinkage. To be compatible with LF3DP, suitable materials must all simultaneously be extrudable, buildable, and pumpable. This limits the range of suitable materials, but as research continues to progress in 3D-printing materials, it is likely that new candidates will continue to arise.

## References
* [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3116190/](https://xponentialworks.com/what-is-large-format-3d-printing-and-who-needs-it/)
* [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4634658/](https://www.sculpteo.com/en/3d-learning-hub/create-3d-file/generative-design/)
* [https://doras.dcu.ie/20464/1/_Naher_AMR_2010_Overview_of_microfluidic_mixing.pdf](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0926580523000328)
* [https://formlabs.com/blog/microfluidics-millifluidics-lab-on-a-chip-manufacturing/](https://digitalcommons.calpoly.edu/cmsp/146/)
* [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6780503/](https://www.ornl.gov/news/ornl-integrated-energy-demo-connects-3d-printed-building-vehicle)
